{ content: 'Cetaceans   whales, dolphins and porpoises   are placental marine mammals. All modern members of the infraorder are fully aquatic and live in the open ocean (except a few species of dolphin which inhabit rivers and estuaries). Cetaceans mate, give birth, suckle their young, and feed exclusively underwater. They range in size from the 1.4-metre (4.6 ft) and 54-kilogram (119 lb) vaquita to the 29.9-metre (98 ft) and 190-metric-ton (210-short-ton) blue whale, which is also the largest creature that has ever existed. Fourteen families, 39 genera, and 88 species of cetaceans are recognised by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). Of the 88 species, the IUCN classifies three as Critically Endangered, seven as Endangered, six as Vulnerable, five as Near Threatened, twenty two as Least Concern, and 45 as Data Deficient.[7]Cetaceans are characterized by a fusiform body, paddle-shaped front limbs and vestigial hind limbs. Their tails have been flattened into flukes to aid propulsion. They have lungs, and must surface regularly to breathe air through blowholes (modified nostrils) situated on the top of the cranium. The cetaceans are included in the order Cetartiodactyla[b] with the Artiodactyla (the even-toed ungulates). Previously, they were placed within their own order, Cetacea, now an infraorder. They are divided into two subgroups, the Odontoceti (the toothed whales, including dolphins and porpoises) and the Mysticeti (the baleen whales), formerly suborders but now considered parvorders or unranked taxa. There are 89 living species of cetaceans (including the functionally extinct Chinese river dolphin).[10] In addition, numerous species of extinct cetaceans have been documented, but they are not listed here. This list contains only the known, extant cetacean species including several recently defined species.Cetaceans are widespread, but some, as with the mysticetes, specialise in certain environments. Most mysticetes prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, and migrate to the equator to give birth. Odontocetes feed largely on fish and squid, but a few, like the killer whale, feed on mammals, such as pinnipeds. Gray whales are specialized for feeding on bottom-dwelling mollusks. Males typically mate with multiple females every year, but females only mate every two to three years. Calves are typically born in the spring and summer months and females bear all the responsibility for raising them. Mothers of some species fast and nurse their young for a relatively long period of time. Some whales produce a variety of vocalizations, notably the songs of the humpback whale. Many species, mainly dolphins, are highly sociable, with some pods reaching over a thousand individuals.[11]Once relentlessly hunted for their products, whales are now protected by international law. Some species are attributed with high levels of intelligence. At the 2012 meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science, support was reiterated for a cetacean bill of rights, listing cetaceans as non-human persons.[12] The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century, with a population low of 450, and are considered functionally extinct by cetologists.[13] The baiji is also considered functionally extinct by the IUCN with, the last sighting in 2004.[10] Besides whaling, they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution. The meat, blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic. Whales occasionally feature in literature and film, as in the great white whale of Herman Melville\'s Moby Dick. Small cetaceans, mainly dolphins, are kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks, but breeding success has been poor. Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.Conservation status codes listed follow the IUCN red list of threatened species (v. 2014.3; data current at 20 January 2015).[14]Where available, the global population estimate has been listed. When not cited or footnoted differently, these are from the IUCN red list of threatened species (v. 2014.3; data current at 20 January 2015).[14]The baleen whales, also called whalebone whales or great whales, form the Mysticeti. Baleen whales are characterized by having baleen plates for filter feeding and two blowholes. During the embryonic phase, Mysticetes do have teeth but they are reabsorbed before birth [15]The family Balaenidae contains two genera and four species. All the Balaenidae whales have no ventral grooves; a distinctive head shape with a strongly arched, narrow rostrum, bowed lower jaw; lower lips that enfold the sides and front of the rostrum; long, narrow, elastic baleen plates (up to 9 times longer than wide) with fine baleen fringes; and fused cervical vertebrae rendering the head immobile.[16]Rorquals are the largest group of baleen whales, with 9 species in two genera. They include the largest animal that has ever lived, the blue whale, which can reach 190 tonnes, the fin whale can easily reach 50 tonnes, and even the smallest of the group, the northern minke whale, reaches 9 tonnes. They take their name from a Norwegian word meaning "furrow whale": all members of the family have a series of longitudinal folds of skin running from below the mouth back to the navel (except the sei whale, which has shorter grooves). These are understood to allow the mouth to expand immensely when feeding.[18] All rorquals have ventral grooves, and are the only cetaceans to have them. Additionally, they all have dorsal fins, broad, gently curving rostra and short baleen plates.[16]The pygmy right whale shares several characteristics with the right whales, although having dorsal fins separates them from right whales, and they have a very distinctive jaw configuration. Pygmy right whales\' heads are no more than one-fourth the size of their bodies, whereas the right whales\' heads are about one-third the size of their bodies.[16]The gray whale has been placed in a family of its own as it is sufficiently different from the right whales and the rorquals. The gray whale is the only benthic feeding baleen whale, filtering small organisms from the mud of shallow seas. They also have a gestation period of over a year, which is unusual for baleen whales.[16]The toothed whales (systematic name Odontoceti) form a parvorder of the cetaceans. As the name suggests, the parvorder is characterized by having teeth (rather than baleen). Toothed whales are active hunters, feeding on fish, squid, and in some cases other marine mammals.Oceanic dolphins are the members of the cetacean family Delphinidae. These aquatic mammals are related to whales and porpoises. As the name implies, these dolphins tend to be found in the open seas, unlike the river dolphins, although a few species such as the Irrawaddy dolphin are coastal or riverine. Six of the larger species in the Delphinidae, the killer whale (orca) and its relatives, are commonly called whales, rather than dolphins. They are also sometimes collectively known as "blackfish".The Delphinidae are characterized by having distinct beaks (unlike the Phocoenidae), two or more fused cervical vertebrae and 20 or more pairs of teeth in their upper jaws. None is more than 4 m long.[16]The cetacean family Monodontidae comprises two unusual whale species, the narwhal, in which the male has a long tusk, and the white beluga.The Monodontidae lack dorsal fins, which have been replaced by tough, fibrous ridges just behind the midpoints of their bodies and are probably an adaptation to swimming under ice, as both do in their Arctic habitat. The flippers are small, rounded and tend to curl up at the ends in adulthood. All, or almost all, the cervical vertebrae are unfused, allowing their heads to be turned independently of their bodies. None has any throat grooves.[16]The dwarf and pygmy sperm whales resemble sperm whales, but are far smaller. They are dark gray, dorsally, while ventrally they are lighter. They have blunt, squarish heads with narrow, underslung jaws; the flippers are set far forward, close to the head and their dorsal fins are set far back down the body.Porpoises are small cetaceans of the family Phocoenidae. They are distinct from dolphins, although the word "porpoise" has been used to refer to any small dolphin, especially by sailors and fishermen. The most obvious visible difference between the two groups is porpoises have spatulate (flattened) teeth distinct from the conical teeth of dolphins. In addition, porpoises are relatively r-selected compared with dolphins: that is, they rear more young more quickly than dolphins. All seven species have small flippers, notched tail flukes, and no beaks. All carry at least 11 pairs of small teeth in their upper and lower jaws.Porpoises, divided into seven species, live in all oceans, mostly near the shore. Probably best known is the harbour porpoise, which can be found across the Northern Hemisphere.The sperm whale characteristically has a large, squarish head one-third the length of its body; the blowhole is slightly to the left hand side; the skin is usually wrinkled; and it has no teeth on the upper jaw.A beaked whale is any of at least 22 species of small whale in the family Ziphiidae. They are one of the least-known families of large mammals: several species have only been described in the last two decades, and it is entirely possible that more remain as yet undiscovered. Six genera have been identified.They possess a unique feeding mechanism known as suction feeding. Instead of catching their prey with teeth, it is sucked into their oral cavity. Their tongue can move very freely, and when suddenly retracted at the same time as the gular floor is distended, the pressure immediately drops within their mouth and the prey is sucked in with the water. The family members are characterized by having a lower jaw that extends at least to the tip of the upper jaw, a shallow or non-existent notch between the tail flukes, a dorsal fin set well back on the body, three of four fused cervical vertebrae, extensive skull asymmetry and two conspicuous throat grooves forming a \'V\' pattern.[16]River dolphins are five species of dolphins which reside in freshwater rivers and estuaries. They are classed in the cetacean superfamily Platanistoidea. Four species live in fresh water rivers. The fifth species, the La Plata dolphin, lives in saltwater estuaries and the ocean. However, it is scientifically classed in the river dolphin family rather than the oceanic dolphin family. All species have adaptations to facilitate fish catching: a long, forceps-like beak with numerous small teeth in both jaws, broad flippers to allow tight turns, small eyes, and unfused neck vertebrae to allow the head to move in relation to the body.This family contains one genus of two species, although the Amazon river dolphin (I. geoffrensis) has been divided into three subspecies:The family Lipotidae is another monotypic taxon, containing only the baiji. Fossil records suggest the dolphin first appeared 25 million years ago and migrated from the Pacific Ocean to the Yangtze River 20 million years ago.[21] The species was declared functionally extinct in 2006 after an expedition to record population numbers found no specimens.The Platanistidae were originally thought to hold only one species (the South Asian river dolphin), but based on differences in skull structure, vertebrae and lipid composition, scientists declared the two populations as separate species in the early 1970s.[22] In 1998, the results of these studies were questioned and the classification reverted to the pre-1970 consensus. Thus, at present, two subspecies are recognized in the genus Platanista, P. gangetica minor (the Indus dolphin) and P. g. gangetica (the Ganges river dolphin).[23]The La Plata river dolphin is the only species of the family Pontoporiidae and genus Pontoporia.' }
